Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger. Today, we're
going to look at our new framework for maxwells,
where we extend our labeling set from natural
numbers to integers. This extends our view
so that we're essentially covering the
entire plane now with possible pixels. So,
it's a much broader framework, and we want to
review some of the hopefully familiar aspects of
the previous maxwell theory in this new setting.
It will be a chance to first of all review some
important things and also get you used to thinking
more two-dimensionally about linear algebra.
The basic objects are these things called maxwells
from integers, where we're considering multisets
of pixels where the pixels themselves can have
entries that are integers, including both negative
and natural numbers. So here, for example, is a
maxwell. It's an M-set of pixels, and the various
pixels can be represented by the positions on this
screen, which we might call the integer screen.
It's typically in green here, with these two
prominent vertical and horizontal bars that align
things and tell you where the indices start. So,
this is the central element whose indices are (0,
0), and then we go down here—the first entry
increases, so (0, 0), (1, 0), (2, 0), and so
on. When we go to the right, we go (0, 0),
(0, 1), (0, 2), (0, 3), and so forth. That,
of course, then extends to the negative values as
well. So, for example, this "3" here is referring
to the fact that we have 3 pixels of this
type: (-2, -1). So that will be (-2, -1).
The other important ingredient is our
multiplication of pixels, which is the fundamental
building block for the algebra of maxwells. This
is the crucial multiplication: KL × MN = KN,
provided that L = M, and otherwise blank or empty.
This multiplication now is a multiplication of
pixels from integers, so now the entries here
can be integers, not just natural numbers.
Alright, so let me remind you of some notations—a
basic notation that helps us understand maxwells.
The idea of a one-maxwell is a simple kind
of maxwell that only has one element in it:
a single pixel, namely (i, j). Now,
of course, the i and j indices can be
any integers. A special kind is the diagonal
one-maxwell, where they are in the form e_ii,
so the two elements are the same. These occur
on the diagonal, and they have the idempotent
property: e_ii² = e_ii. If you multiply one
of these diagonal ones with another one,
you either get the one that you started
with, if they're both the same—that's
basically this rule here—or, if they're not
the same, you get the zero-maxwell. So this
zero here represents the zero-maxwell,
the empty maxwell—just the empty set.
Here's our picture of our screen with our
two canonical vertical and horizontal lines.
There's the (0, 0) spot, so this now is the
place or the home for (0, 0). Here's e_11,
e_22, e_-1,-1, e_-2,-2, etc. So actually, if
we drew a representation for, say, e_-1,-1,
we would end up with a single "1" there and
zeros everywhere else. These are kind of units
in the world of maxwells, and prominently,
we can go either in this direction or we can
carry on in this direction here as well.
So, it is a two-sided aspect of things.
Now, suppose that J is a set from integers—it's
a set of integers. Then e_J is the sum of little
j belonging to capital J of these e_j,j's.
And I need to remind you that when I say set,
I always mean something that
you can actually write down,
so it's an explicit set in our standard
notation. So, it's by definition finite,
okay? We don't even consider infinite things
because you can't write them down, okay? So,
this kind of J we will call an identity
maxwell or maybe a partial identity maxwell.
For example, if J is the set , then
it can be represented as e_J here. So here's our
basic two lines—a bit of a crowded diagram, but
you see a "1" there, that "1" represents that zero
there, the -2 there, another one there, and this
one represents there. So, this thing here is e_11,
this is e_00, and this is e_-2,-2. So in
terms of pixels, here is the M-set e_J.
Let's just talk a little bit about rows and
columns. So, we have this J—we can also talk
about the rows of J and the columns of J, and that
will be important for us. The rows of J are just
the rows that go through the various entries of
J, while the columns are these ones here—again,
they go through the various diagonal entries
that are represented by J. So, here we have
the rows of this particular J, and here are the
columns of this particular J, three of each side.
Now, if M is any maxwell, then the product
e_J M is the restriction of M to the rows
of J. The effect of multiplying by e_J—this is
just the same kind of story that happens in the
case we started talking about when we
were just restricting to indices 1,
2, 3, and so on. The algebra is
completely the same. The e_J M
is the restriction of M to the rows of
J, while the other way around, M × e_J,
is the restriction to the columns of J—mainly
a restriction here. In other words, basically,
forget about all the entries of M that are outside
the columns or, in this case, outside the rows.
Then, if we combine those two ideas, we have a
maxwell M, and we multiply on the left by e_J
and on the right also by e_J, then we get the
cumulative effect of restricting to the rows of
J and to the columns of J. So, for example, if J
is the same as before: , then e_J looks
like this, and here's e_J as well. And suppose we
take some arbitrary maxwell M—we multiply it by
e_J on the left and e_J on the right. What do
we get? Well, it's an excellent exercise to
convince yourself that this is what you get—that
we end up just looking at the rows and the columns
associated with J. So, the rows of J would be the
-2 row, the 0 row, and the 1 row. Column J would
be the -2 column, the 0 column, and the 1 column.
If we ignore everything that is not in both the
rows and columns that I've just mentioned, then we
get this thing here. So, this is the restriction
of this to the row -2, 0, and 1, and to the column
-2 down there, 0 over there, and 1 over there. So,
everything outside gets killed, and everything
that's in, say, one row but not a column ends
up being killed. So, the only entries that are
left are the ones in the rows and columns of J.
This very much parallels what we've done in
previous videos when we talked about maxwell
algebra, so you might want to go back to some
of those to remind yourself. If we have a set
J, a set of integers, then we can consider J × J,
and by that, we mean the set of lists of the form
(j_1, j_2), where j_1 and j_2 belong to J. So,
this is a set of pixels from integers because
this is just a pixel from integers, and a set
of pixels from integers we will call a frame.
So, then max J × J is the type of a maxwell
M whose support is in J × J. With our
example of J = , here are our standard
lines—there's the (0, 0) position—then the J × J
frame looks like what? Well, first of all, here's
an e_-2,-2, e_00, and e_11. So here are sort of
the basic entries, the diagonal entries that
define e_J. Then, the positions that correspond to
columns and rows are just these ones here: 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. So these are the pixels whose
rows are either 1, 0, or -2, and whose columns are
either 1, 0, or -2, and there are nine of them.
So, when we talk about max J × J, we're talking
about all the maxwells whose support is this or
is contained in this particular frame—the
frame consisting of these nine positions in
our integer screen. So, this is going to be a
maxwell subalgebra of max int. In other words,
if you take the product or the sum of any two
such things, you're going to stay inside this
closed algebra. So, this is a very nice, flexible
way of finding essentially what we might call
matrix algebra, okay, traditionally. But we
can find them now anywhere or everywhere on
our screen in this kind of symmetrical
way. You pick a subset J of integers,
and then that's basically picking a bunch of
diagonal elements along the diagonal, and then
associated with that, you have this something like
a square thing—but it's not graphically a square,
but it's arithmetically a square—of positions
that support this maxwell subalgebra.
Alright, so this is by way of review but also an
extension of the ideas that we had before in the
natural number case. We're now extending this
to cover the entire plane—that's the crucial
difference. We're now allowing arbitrary
integers to be indices for our pixels.
Now, we are going to see that this
maxwell algebra, extended to integers,
has a lot of beautiful properties.
It will be very useful for us when
we want to talk about extension fields
or more general sorts of field theory,
but we'll also see that it has a lot of
connections with calculus. Having this
two-sided aspect of things will play a very big
role when we connect things with calculus ideas.
A very useful tool in this understanding is the
idea of shifting along the diagonal. It turns out
that the entire maxwell framework that we've
been talking about is kind of invariant under
shifting diagonally along the diagonal line, and
we can make that more precise by introducing a
formal shift operation. So, for k an integer,
let's define S_k. This is going to be a shift
on pixels from integers, defined in the following
way. So here, m and n are a pixel from integers,
and S_k is our shift. By definition,
this is going to be (m + k, n + k). So,
what we're doing is we're adding k to both
values at the same time—that's effectively
shifting it diagonally in this direction if k is
positive and in this direction if k is negative.
Okay, so now I'm going to leave you with a couple
of exercises. The first one is to show that this
respects multiplication. This is a crucial one:
that if you have two pixels p and q, and you're
interested in multiplying them, then the shift
of their product is the same as the product of
their shifts. So, if you shift p and you shift q
and then you multiply, that's the same as first
multiplying p and q and then shifting. Also,
show that there's a kind of composite property,
which is almost obvious: that if you shift by
k and then you shift by l, it's the same as
shifting by l + k. So, the shifts themselves
have a kind of pleasant algebraic aspect.
Generally speaking, once we've defined something
for pixels, we want to extend that to maxwells,
which are just M-sets of pixels.
So, we know how to shift pixels,
so it follows that we should be able to
shift maxwells just by doing the M-set
version of the shifting—namely, shift
all the pixels in a given maxwell. So,
we'll do that. We'll define the shift S_k—k
is still an integer—from pixels to maxwells,
and it's just the M-set extension.
Let me illustrate it with an example.
So, here is a maxwell—it has a few pixels,
four of them—and let's say that k equals 2. So,
the S_k of M—we're going to apply S_k to each
one of these pixels, so it's a new multiset
with S_k of this, and S_k of this, S_k of
this, and S_k of this. Each one of these,
individually, we're just shifting
by 2. So, if we shift this by 2,
we get (0, 5); also (0, 5); here we get
(3, 2); and here, I guess we get (-1, 1).
Diagrammatically, this maxwell here is,
let's see, there's a (-2, 3), (-2, 3),
so there's two of them; there's a (1, 0)—that's
that one there; there's a (-3, -1)—(-3, -1);
so this is the representation of this maxwell. And
when we shift it by 2, it means we're shifting in
this direction here diagonally. So, everything
goes down in that direction—two down this way,
two across this way. So, the one that's appearing
here goes there, the two that were here go there,
the one that was here goes there. So, the whole
thing has just moved down diagonally by two.
Now let's identify some important
features of this shifting of maxwells.
Say, shift invariants for maxwells, and
let's summarize things in the theorem. So,
if k is an integer, and M and N are maxwells
from integers, then the shift S_k(M) + the
shift S_k(N) equals the shift S_k(M + N), so
it respects addition. If you add two maxwells
and then shift, it's the same as first shifting
and then adding. That's almost obvious. This is
a little bit more subtle: that S_k(M) × S_k(N)
is S_k(MN). If you multiply M and N and shift,
it's the same thing as first shifting M and
shifting N and then multiplying them. So,
to summarize: this shifting does not
really affect the algebra of maxwells.
This is an aspect of matrix multiplication—it's
not very complicated, but it's something that's
not that visible in standard linear algebra
because we're usually working there in a fixed
framework. We're working with 3x3 matrices
or 4x5 matrices or something like that,
so we have a fixed kind of framework. It doesn't
really make sense to shift everything down because
then we would sort of move out of the domain in
which we're working. But now, we have this more
flexible, bigger point of view. We're working
in the entire plane—we're not restricted by
any kind of boundaries, and so the shifting is
a more natural thing that's more visible to us.
Here's a little exercise: you can verify the
theorem for these two particular maxwells. So,
they're cute little maxwells, only 2x2. Here's
2, 1, 3, 4—that maxwell there—and the N is 5,
2, 1, 3. You can try, say, for different
values of k and just verify that it works.
And even better, you can sort of write
out proofs of why these formulas hold.
So, we're now in quite a nice position.
We've extended our labeling or our index
sets so that now we can consider indices that take
on arbitrary integer values. It's a big expansion,
but we also want to expand in another important
way, okay, which is different but still utilizes
this bigger picture of having integers at
our disposal now, not just natural numbers.
And that is that we want to extend things so that
the actual entries of our maxwells are themselves
possibly negative. We don't always want to be
just considering natural number entries—we want
to have a -2 possibly in a matrix. Of course,
we want to do that, so we have to set that up,
though, because this "2" here represents a
multiplicity of a certain number of pixels. So,
in order to make sense of what that might mean
if that was -2 instead, we have to get our heads
around what it means to talk about -2 pixels or,
in fact, what it means to talk about -2 anything.
So, we've talked about -2—we've introduced
-2 as this abstract integer object, something
that we write down. But how do we multiply
that -2 by something else? In particular,
how do we multiply -2 by a pixel? To understand
that, we are going to have to go back to our
particle-antiparticle orientation coming
from physics and really extend that now. So,
it's a consequence of having our negative numbers
set up the way we have them that we are going to
have to consider this particle-antiparticle
duality in a much wider context. That's going
to further challenge our intuitions and the
familiar ways of thinking that we're used to.
I hope you'll join me for that. I'm
Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening